.TH VNSTAT 1 "JANUARY 2008" "version 1.6" "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
vnStat \- a console-based network traffic monitor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vnstat
[
.B \-Ddhlmqrstuvw?
] [
.B \-i
.I interface
] [
.B \-tr
.I time
] [
.B \-\-cleartop
] [
.B \-\-config
.I file
] [
.B \-\-days
] [
.B \-\-debug
] [
.B \-\-disable
] [
.B \-\-dumpdb
] [
.B \-\-enable
] [
.B \-\-help
] [
.B \-\-hours
] [
.B \-\-iface
.I interface
] [
.B \-\-live
] [
.B \-\-longhelp
] [
.B \-\-months
] [
.B \-\-nick
.I nickname
] [
.B \-\-query
] [
.B \-\-rebuildtotal
] [
.B \-\-reset
] [
.B \-\-short
] [
.B \-\-showconfig
] [
.B \-\-testkernel
] [
.B \-\-top10
] [
.B \-\-traffic
.I time
] [
.B \-\-update
] [
.B \-\-version
] [
.B \-\-weeks
] [
.B \-\-dumpxml
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B vnStat
is a console-based network traffic monitor. It keeps a log of hourly,
daily and monthly network traffic for the selected interface(s). However,
it isn't a packet sniffer. The traffic information is analyzed from the
.BR proc (5)
filesystem. That way vnStat can be used even without root permissions.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI "-d, --days"
Show traffic for days.
.TP
.BI "-h, --hours"
Show traffic for the last 24 hours.
.TP
.BI "-m, --months"
Show traffic for months.
.TP
.BI "-s, --short"
Use short output mode. This mode is also used if more than one
database is available.
.TP
.BI "-t, --top10"
Show all time top10 traffic days.
.TP
.BI "-w, --weeks"
Show traffic for 7 days, current and previous week.
.TP
.BI "-tr " time
Calculate how much traffic goes through the selected interface during
the given
.I time 
seconds. The 
.I time
will be 5 seconds if a number parameter isn't included.
.TP
.BI "-l, --live"
Display current transfer rate for the selected interface in real time
until interrupted. Statistics will be shown after interruption if runtime
was more than 10 seconds.
.TP
.BI "-i, --iface " interface
Select one specific
.I interface
and apply actions to only it.
.TP
.BI "-q, --query"
Force database query mode.
.TP
.BI "-u, --update"
Update all enabled databases or only the one specified with
.B -i
parameter.
.TP
.BI "-r, --reset"
Reset the internal counters in the database for the selected
interface. Use this if the interface goes down and back up,
otherwise that interface will get some extra traffic to its database.
.TP
.BI "--sync"
Synchronize internal counters in the database with interface
counters for the selected interface. Use this if the system is
rebooted but interface counters aren't reseted. Such can occur
when suspend to ram/disk is used.
.TP
.BI "--enable, --disable"
Enable or disable updates for selected interface. Useful for
interfaces that aren't always available, like ppp0. If the interface
goes down it should be disabled in order to avoid errors. Add something
like
.B "vnstat -r --disable -i ppp0"
to the script that's executed when
the interface goes down and
.B "vnstat --enable -i ppp0"
to the up script.
.TP
.BI "-v, --version"
Show current version.
.TP
.BI "--cleartop"
Remove all top10 entries.
.TP
.BI "-?, --help"
Show a command summary.
.TP
.BI "--longhelp"
Show complete options list.
.TP
.BI "--nick " nickname
Set the selected interfaces
.I nickname
as an alias the will be displayed in queries. Usage of
.B -u
is required to save the change.
.TP
.BI "--config " file
Use
.I file
as config file instead of using normal config file search function.
.TP
.BI "--rebuildtotal"
Reset the total traffic counters and recount those using recorded months.
.TP
.BI "--testkernel"
Test if the kernel boot time information always stays the same like it should or
if it's shifting.
.TP
.BI "-D, --debug"
Show additional debug output.
.TP
.BI "--dumpdb"
Instead of showing the database with a formated output, this output will
dump the whole database in a format that should be easy to parse with most
script languages. Use this for example with PHP, Perl or Python to make a
custom  webpage. The dump uses ; as field delimeter.

  active;1                        activity status
  interface;eth0                  name for the interface
  nick;inet                       nick (if given)
  created;1023895272              creation date in Unix time
  updated;1065467100              when the database was updated
  totalrx;569605                  all time total received MB
  totaltx;2023708                 all time total transmitted MB
  currx;621673719                 latest rx value in /proc
  curtx;981730184                 latest tx value in /proc
  totalrxk;644                    total rx kB counter
  totaltxk;494                    total tx kB counter
  btime;1059414541                system boot time in Unix time

Then follows 30 lines like the following

  d;0;1078696800;559;7433;68;557;1

where d = days, 0 = day number in database (0 is today), 1077314401 date in
Unix time, 559 = rx MB, 7433 = tx MB, 68 = rx kB, 557 = tx kB and 1 tells that
vnStat has filled this value and it is in use.

  m;0;1078092000;48649;139704;527;252;1   (x12)
  t;0;1078351200;5979;47155;362;525;1     (x10)
  h;0;1078699800;118265;516545            (x24)

m = months, t = top10 and h = hours, all other fields are in the same order as in days
except hours that doesn't have a separate kB value. For hours the forth and fifth fields
have values in kB.
.TP
.BI "--dumpxml"
This option will give you a choice to dump the relative data in XML format. it can be 
used with " -i ethN [-t|-d|-m|-h|no option] ", for example,

  $ vnstat --dumpxml -i eth1
  <?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8' standalone='yes'?>
  <traffic id='content' p='summary' colnum='0'>
  <us><u id='0' sym=' KB' val='1'/><u id='1' sym=' MB' val='1024'/><u id='2' sym=' GB' val='1048576'/></us>
  <r f1='08/04/06-->08/07/04' x=''><f><s>68.7722</s><u>2</u></f><f><s>4.66</s><u>2</u></f><f><s>73.44</s><u>2</u></f></r>
  <r f1='this month: 08/07' x=''><f><s>293.9648</s><u>1</u></f><f><s>26.58</s><u>1</u></f><f><s>320.54</s><u>1</u></f></r>
  <r f1='this week: 27' x=''><f><s>346.7510</s><u>1</u></f><f><s>35.61</s><u>1</u></f><f><s>1.05</s><u>2</u></f></r>
  <r f1='today: 08/07/04' x=''><f><s>8.9844</s><u>1</u></f><f><s>649.00</s><u>0</u></f><f><s>9.62</s><u>1</u></f></r>
  <r f1='current hour: 12:00' x=''><f><s>13.0000</s><u>0</u></f><f><s>5.00</s><u>0</u></f><f><s>18.00</s><u>0</u></f></r>
  </traffic>

  $ vnstat --dumpxml -i eth1 -m
  <?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8' standalone='yes'?>
  <traffic id='content' p='month' colnum='12'>
  <us><u id='0' sym=' KB' val='1'/><u id='1' sym=' MB' val='1024'/><u id='2' sym=' GB' val='1048576'/></us>
  <r f1='08-04' x='08-04'><f><s>12.2272</s><u>2</u></f><f><s>738.23</s><u>1</u></f><f><s>12.95</s><u>2</u></f></r>
  <r f1='08-05' x='08-05'><f><s>18.9075</s><u>2</u></f><f><s>2.94</s><u>2</u></f><f><s>21.85</s><u>2</u></f></r>
  <r f1='08-06' x='08-06'><f><s>37.3505</s><u>2</u></f><f><s>1002.33</s><u>1</u></f><f><s>38.33</s><u>2</u></f></r>
  <r f1='08-07' x='08-07'><f><s>293.9648</s><u>1</u></f><f><s>26.58</s><u>1</u></f><f><s>320.54</s><u>1</u></f></r>
  <mf><s>37.35</s><u>2</u></mf>
  </traffic>

  Acronym List of the above XML output:

    p: "page" type, indicates the output is for summary|month|top10|day|hour
    colnum: the number of column in the X axis direction when drawing SVG graph
    us: units
    u: unit
    s: size
    r: row
    f: field
    f1: the first field, the time info (day|hour|month|week|total)
    x: the value of the X axis
    mf: the max number of all the Received and Transmited fields

  Description of the XML result:

   Line            Description
   ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   <?xml...>       the XML header

   <traffic ....>  the XML data header, "p" indicates the info type, "colnum"
                   indicates the width of the X axis when drawing a SVG graph

   <us...>         define the unit information, they are defined as (serial, symbol, value)

   <r...>          store the traffic of every time unit
                   (day|hour|month|week|total) every row include four field, the first field is
                   the time info, the following three fields are respectively Received,
                   Transmited, and Total traffic. the traffic are described as size(s) and
                   unit(u). the unit is defined in the <us...> line.  so,
                   <f><s>12.2272</s><u>2</u></f> means 12.2272GB or 12.2272*1048576KB

   <mf..>          the max traffic of every Received and Transmited Traffic in the above rows.
   -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This option is added by Wu Zhangjin, it is designed for vnStatSVG(http://vnstatsvg.sourceforge.net).

.SH FILES
.TP
.I /var/lib/vnstat/
This directory contains all databases the program uses. Files are
named according to the monitored interfaces.
.TP
.I /etc/vnstat.conf
Config file that will be used unless
.I $HOME/.vnstatrc
exists.
.SH EXAMPLES
.BI "vnstat -u -i" 
.I interface
forces a database update for
.I interface
or creates the database if it doesn't exist. This is usually the
first command used after a fresh install.
.PP
.BI "vnstat -u -i"
.I interface
.BI "--nick"
.I nick
gives
.I interface
the nickname
.I "nick"
and that information will be later included with queries.
.PP
.BI "vnstat -u -r --disable -i
.I interface
resets the internal counters of
.I interface
and disables it from being updated before enabled again with the
.BI "--enable"
parameter. This feature is especially useful for interfaces like ppp0
that aren't always active.
.SH RESTRICTIONS
Updates needs to be executed at least as often as it is possible for the interface
to generate enough traffic to wrap the kernel interface traffic counter. Otherwise
it is possible that some traffic won't be seen. This isn't an issue for 64 bit kernels
but at least one update every hour is always required in order to provide proper input.
With 32 bit kernels the maximum time between two updates depends on how fast the
interface can transfer 4 GB. Calculated theoretical times are:
.PP
    10 Mbit:  54 minutes
   100 Mbit:   5 minutes
  1000 Mbit:  30 seconds
.PP
However, for 1000 Mbit interfaces updating once every minute is usually a
working solution.
.PP
Estimated traffic values are likely to be somewhat inaccurate if daily
traffic is low because only the MB counter is used to calculate the
estimate.
.PP
Virtual and aliased interfaces can't be monitored because the kernel doesn't
provide traffic information for that type of interfaces. Such interfaces are
usually named eth0:0, eth0:1, eth0:2 etc. where eth0 is the actual interface
being aliased.
.SH AUTHOR
Teemu Toivola <tst at iki dot fi>, 
Wu Zhangjin <wuzhangjin at gmail dot com>
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR proc (5),
.BR ifconfig (8)
